My Tam Chieu Hoan Quan Tien answers
Tran Thi Phuong Ha's question. The
question is as follows: "Ms. Yen, I
want to ask if I should love my father
or hate him because he is a bad person,
gambling, cockfighting, helping children,
raping others, sleeping with others,
and then telling his friends to hide in the
bushes to watch. He's even proud of
having slept with many girls. Now he's
61 years old, he eats vegetarian meals
and meditates hoping to attain enlightenment. He
even kills ants and says they deserve to
die. If I don't love my father, am I being
unfilial? My
father only eats vegetarian to attain enlightenment, but
he likes to kill beautiful girls, he kills chickens and
ducks. He's also a violent man who beats my mother.
Ms. Yen, I just hate my
father so much. Am I being unfilial?" "
Dear friends, I
share and sympathize with you
in such a family situation.
Yes, but there's also the matter of behavior.
You said you were unfilial, but first of all, your parents
are unfilial."
A thread: "Parents then..."  To be unfilial
to one's parents, even if it means committing murder,
I'll separate it into two parts.
I'll separate it into two: the action
is wrong.
Yes, I'll separate it into two parts: this action
is wrong, so I won't learn it
and I won't teach anyone to follow that action.
But my father is my father. I
love my father, and his action of hitting my mother
is wrong, so I'm not
satisfied with that action.
How can I stop
that action? But I don't hate my parents either. My
father is my father.
When we do something, we need to think
thoroughly to separate our
feelings from our intellect. If we
already hate someone, then we can't
wish for them to encounter misfortune.
If we hate our father, we
'll wish for misfortune, we
'll want him to suffer.
I want my father to disappear from
this life,
right? And is it that I don't have
compassion for my father? I can torment him when
he suffers.
People online, especially those with the character "Hoan,"
see their elderly parents getting sick and then resorting to violence
instead of care. After the beating, they
say things like, "That's how it was in the old days, you see this, you
see that." That's because people can't
distinguish between actions and the person.
Their parents' actions weren't good;
we
shouldn't learn from them, but we
shouldn't dwell on those actions. Instead, we should support
our parents and help them overcome those negative behaviors. We shouldn't hate our parents or feel ashamed of them.
If
we feel ashamed of our parents, it
will lead to
a chain reaction of problems, affecting everyone from our spouses to
our children. For example, you could say, "
Your father is like that, but those are
wrong actions. I
love him very much, and I respect him.
I should serve him."
That's clear. Any
wrong actions by the father are not something we should learn from,
and we should support him and help him overcome those
wrong actions. We should
n't associate him with his parents or with his mother. (
My Tam, character "Hoan")  The
situation is that if a father has two wives, then
of course, with two wives,
how can he possibly provide complete care for his children?
Others have one wife and one husband, but
the mind of the child never blames that.
Whether it's the father or the wife is the father's business,
and the father is the child's father. If the father may
not treat the mother well, the child should support him
so that he thinks well of the mother, and the
mother thinks well of the father, so that they can get along
better. This is the mind of the child. The mind of the child
never blindly follows
bad news or listens to what this person or
that person says. The mind of the child doesn't
listen to that, and it seems that because I don't
listen to that, no
one talks about that to me.
And always, the mind of the child needs to
say, even though it's very small, it
shows a very positive attitude when the father
says good things to the mother, and the mother says
good things to the father. Therefore, the mind of the child is connected to
the two, so we shouldn't be
angry with our parents. We should separate the
actions and actions of our father.
My mother used to grill separately,
but I couldn't separate myself like that.
Later, I got angry with my parents, and
this caused my wife and I to get angry with them.
I treated
my parents badly, and
even my children treated
my parents badly. That's a
huge mistake. Parents
are parents, and actions are actions.
We separate them. Uncle
Hoang Quan liked this kind of separation from a
young age.
After Uncle Hoang Quan was in third grade,
and
only then, two friends
from afar spoke ill of him, saying that he was a father
with two wives. So
Uncle Hoang Quan shouldn't be
like that; he doesn't have a father here. Uncle Hoang Quan said that
sometimes he would tell himself, "
Back then, I was
still in school, and I was talking to you.
Uncle Hoang Quan's heart was in my heart,
I was afraid to let you know that even if
you have parents, he's not as good as
me." That means Uncle
Hoang Quan really cherishes his parents.  My mind is
completely focused on avoiding
people who might say things
like, "My mind is completely focused on the game," and that just by
touching my parents, I'll
immediately stop playing
with them. Even if I play with
100 people, I won't say anything about the situation or
cause conflict; I just
won't play because when I was little, I
had a habit of being very
good at it. I'd give my friends 2,000 points, and that's because
if anyone made a mistake, or even said anything about my
parents, I would absolutely not let them
see my cards again. I still have that habit,
that habit. And from then on, it
was only a one-time thing, and
from then on, it never went up. When I grew up, I would never, ever
say anything about my parents
because I live very well. I
don't want to have any mistakes that would
cause people to say things that hurt
my parents, or that
my parents were
hurt.  That's not allowed. It's the same
here. You shouldn't
judge your father's actions like
that, and you shouldn't tell anyone. You
shouldn't tell your boyfriend,
your wife, your
brother, your husband, or
your children about your father's actions. I'll keep it to myself. It's okay to confide in someone
else,
but I don't know about the way he behaves. I'm okay to ask about
it, but if I let others
know, I'll hide it again. It shouldn't be like
that; it hurts your parents. Instead,
I'll find a way to
resolve things internally in the best way possible
and live a
decent life. That means I should work to give
my parents money because they are struggling and they
really want
money from me. Because I give them money, I
'll do everything I can to help them.
Oh, and Tâm, even though I'm
poor, I'm using all my strength
to work.  Perhaps you haven't
given your parents money to support them yet, so the Heart of the Hoan
Quan temple says that
your parents' hearts are being guided to elevate their minds,
leading them into the path of
Buddhism. That's at the beginning, with the food
at the Hoang Quan temple, and
after opening the Heart of the Hoan Quan temple, once the Heart of the Hoan Quan temple has
formed in your heart about
your child, then whatever you say,
your parents will listen. But at first, we must use our sincere hearts through our sincere sacrifices so that our parents can feel who we are. Only then can
we guide our parents into
Buddhism, or guide them to what is
good and right, and
correct their shortcomings. That's the
way
Princess Hoan Quan shares honestly with you
here. The Heart of the Hoan Quan temple says this to
you: we should establish
a one-way relationship, remember? In
this life, we use many
one-way relationships, for example...  The relationship
between boss and employee: When you go to work,
consider whether your relationship
with your boss is one-sided. The
boss might scold you, might say something wrong, but
as an employee, you can't be absent, you ca
n't
argue or debate like the boss. Isn't that a
one-sided relationship? Do
you agree? It's a one-
sided relationship. So, let's use that
one-sided relationship to treat your
parents,
Mr. Tuan. Treat your parents and
your teachers. For example, when we go to school,
we also have to use
one-sided relationships, but with a
one-sided relationship based on enlightenment,
not a one-sided relationship based on
exploitation and suppression. If there's
exploitation, there will be suppression. But if
we establish these one-
sided relationships with understanding and
wisdom, we will be happy and joyful
with them. The One-
Minded Abode of the One-Minded Abode reiterates the
one-sided relationship:
Even if your parents say something wrong, even if they are
bad people, you shouldn't judge them. For example...  Like
my boss, the one in the office,
if some people in the office were to badmouth me, and someone
heard it, I'd be dead, right? It's
impossible, isn't it? That's what you
call a one-sided relationship. If
you're enlightened, you'll know that
everyone has flaws, no matter how bad they are.
But if
you don't do anything to help them become better, there's
no point in talking about it, right? It's the same
with your boss, with your colleagues, and with your
neighbors. You should also
maintain a one-sided relationship so you can
live peacefully with your neighbors.
If you're constantly arguing about right and wrong, gossiping about this and
that, how can you have a
good relationship with your neighbors?
Look, these one-sided relationships are the ones
that can
benefit us a lot, meaning they
bring good fortune to ourselves and to
others.
Experience the happiness
after establishing
one-sided relationships. For example, with parents,
we need to build a one-sided relationship.
One-sided means that
whatever is wrong, we accept it
so that we can improve ourselves, not that
we oppose our parents. We
only
speak up and support them when we feel that our parents accept what we say,
not when we argue or fight back.
For example, in your situation, it
can only be like this: put your mind
at ease. If you accept your father's behavior,
you might find yourself in
a situation where you point out a mistake and
your father retorts, "You're
nothing, Dad!" That's
extremely dangerous, isn't it?
Then you'll be putting your parents' mistakes on the
line. In this life, you'll never
receive the same guidance and genuine affection from your parents.
If we treat
our parents poorly, but they teach us something, then
it's something else entirely,
right? It would be too foolish. If
we listen, we will benefit.
So, regarding parents, I
advise you not to dwell on their faults,
but to establish a one-
way relationship. That is, learn whatever you
can from your parents, because you can
learn anything. If your parents have
any negative traits, and you feel bad about them, then
you should never go to that
place. That's also called learning. And if you have
positive traits, learn from them to
develop them; that's also called learning. So,
you can learn anything from your parents, and
you
should also use one-way relationships with those around you.
There are many examples with the mind of the
Bodhisattva, the Bodhisattva. The
Bodhisattva may make mistakes, may
practice incorrectly, but the mind of the
Bodhisattva never gets angry at the Bodhisattva, right?
If the Bodhisattva is too
focused on guiding the Bodhisattva once, and
then the next time, the Bodhisattva remains the same,
and ten times after that, it's still the same.
If the mind of the Bodhisattva is too focused and gets angry,
how can their mind become focused?  It is
entirely possible to guide fellow practitioners
on the path of the Golden Mantra, but the
Golden Mantra also establishes a
one-way relationship with fellow practitioners
in front of the Golden Mantra. The
Golden Mantra can encourage fellow practitioners, but it can also attract them with all its
might, even if there are fellow practitioners. The Golden Mantra
never expects fellow
practitioners to
reciprocate with
gratitude; it never
establishes such relationships.
And the Golden Mantra would never
hope that fellow practitioners would give the Golden Mantra
something, for example, just a mustard seed. The
Golden Mantra never establishes relationships
with such expectations. Therefore, there are
many relationships that we must establish that
are one-way. For example, fellow practitioners
are also the station chief.
Establishing one-way relationships
with fellow practitioners below is correct, is
n't it? If we establish
two-way relationships, we will suffer;
we will be bad people. For example, if I give
you this, you must give me this.  That's it, if you
do this, you have to know that if you do it alone,
you will only suffer.
One-way relationships are the kind of
relationships that enlightened people have, meaning
they know that only giving matters, they
know that you have to speak at the right time. Doing
good for others means
bringing convenience to others, and
you also benefit. So what do you call it?
You live peacefully, happily, you
live contentedly, without worries, right?
That's a great benefit, isn't it?
Because in
this life, what we like most is to be
easy, happy, and not have a good mind. Seeing this,
your heart will feel very happy.
That's all. Establishing a
one-way relationship is the kind of
relationship established by wise people. You
won't be troubled, and
we are always ready for
forgiveness, always ready for support,
right? Continuous support, and yet we are not troubled
by all the
troubles of the world, not being affected by the mind's influence.
The technique of establishing a one-way relationship is based on the
mind's reflection. It has
consciousness.  Small and always living with the
awareness in one-way relationships, giving
without expecting anything in
return.
Yes, and whoever helps me, I am grateful for much more.
That makes
my heart and mind bright,
and I don't cause trouble for
anyone. Wherever I go, they receive
my sincerity if I follow the path of friendship. But
if we don't establish
one-way relationships, we
suffer greatly, always resenting our parents, wondering
what they gave us,
what fame they gave us, whether they set a good example for us. That is, we
suffer, and we
cannot
change our parents,
nor can we change
this world. We must change
ourselves to conform to
this world, to find happiness in the
Ten Virtues of Samantabhadra, the Virtue of Death, always conforming to sentient beings.
Because conforming to sentient beings
is the way we establish this
one-way relationship. With
this path of friendship, we will be able to practice
the ninth vow, which is to conform to sentient
beings.  Living among all
beings, whether close or distant, good or evil,
we don't
know why. Because Thuận sees that
we establish one-
way relationships, which is incredibly beneficial, not only for ourselves but
also for those around us,
not only in this life but in many lives to come.
That is also the way we
practice the Bodhisattva path from this life
to many lives. We must always
establish one-way relationships. For example, the
one-way relationship we have with the
Buddha is a one-way relationship with all beings. Those
who know how to establish
one-way relationships will experience peace and
happiness, and they will have very sharp ways of behaving.
I eat Sơn's jerk. It's
very good. Establishing
one-way relationships is establishing
relationships that bring benefits to oneself
at all times and in all places. That means we
experience peace and happiness, we have fewer
worries, and we are always enlightened.
Throughout the present, a one-sided relationship
allows me to be clear-headed in the
present, enabling me to assess issues
very wisely. Because without resentment or manipulation, I
remain clear-headed. Because I still
want to benefit from relationships
—I give, you give—that's why
I'm constantly losing touch. That's why I have
difficulty communicating. Even
with my boss,
I can still establish a
genuine, reciprocal relationship because that way,
people will feel
my sincerity, they
will feel
my talent, and they will naturally support me.
That's also cause and effect, is
n't it? This is also cause and effect, not just
clever exchange through
gifts. Of course,
throughout the world, when there are gifts, there are still some,
but people will
receive the fruit of my sincerity;
they will receive more than those who are
fake, right? I am sincere. For
other necessary things, I have to exchange gifts. Because...
That's the whole world, and that's what
gratitude is. People are grateful, and
they need material things, right? But
material things, if you go with genuine sincerity and
pure behavior,
you'll surely receive more, won't you? That's why
studying Buddhist teachings is truly beneficial.
However,
establishing these relationships from a young age is important.
The meaning of Buddhist teachings is that it
aligns with the ninth principle of
Samantabhadra Bodhisattva, which is to adapt to sentient beings. By
establishing one-
way relationships, we will adapt to
all sentient beings and live a very beneficial and happy life.
Now that we are enlightened, if we
act sincerely and
virtuously, the karmic rewards will fill us, wo
n't they? No
matter how much we have—money,
fame, the love of others, the
respect of others—it's all within our
own karma, not
outside of our own karma. If we
cultivate our own karma well,
whatever we receive, we will
receive it, and that reward is the root.
Our merit increases many times over because of our enlightenment. If
we use
worldly cleverness,
which contains deceit, we will only
lose our merit,
not gain it.
So, I'm sharing this
with you, Tan Chau, to help you establish
one-sided relationships with your parents. When your
parents are at fault, they have many worries
and feelings.
You should use your parents as a place to
practice and cultivate obedience. Once you can do that, you can
practice with
others. For those who don't have parents or
aren't close to them, you should establish
such relationships with those
around you. We must think deeply about
this, and we
should apply our thinking to the relationships in
our current reality, and
develop our
behavior accordingly. We should
review and practice this daily, just like we do.  Math in literature,
but if we review
that formula, we will truly gain the
merit of a Bodhisattva. That merit belongs to the
Bodhisattva Samantabhadra, which
is the
great merit of benefiting sentient beings. The merit of a
Bodhisattva alone will help
us achieve happiness in
wealth and happiness for many lifetimes to come. I
wish you, Mr. Ty, that you and I may be
truly happy and peaceful because we
live according to the Buddha's teachings.